# 15. First Occurrence



Given a target integer T and an integer array A sorted in ascending order, find the index of the first occurrence of T in A or return -1 if there is no such index.

**Assumptions**

* There can be duplicate elements in the array.

**Examples**

* A = {1, 2, 3}, T = 2, return 1
* A = {1, 2, 3}, T = 4, return -1
* A = {1, 2, 2, 2, 3}, T = 2, return 1

**Corner Cases**

* What if A is null or A of zero length? We should return -1 in this case.

### 题意

在一个可能有重复target的sorted array里 return 第一个target的index。

### 思路：

as long as the searching range is equal or larger than three. we can compare the left and right to the mid, and shorted one side which is unvalid. 

there three case when we compare our mid to the target

1. array\[mid\] == target: we are not sure if this mid is the first occur target, so we keep it. but we know all the element on the right hand side of mid are surely not the first occur target, even they all equal to target. 
2. array\[mid\] &lt; target: if the mid is not equal to target, we can get rid of it. and all the element of the left hand side of this mid. 
3. array\[mid\] &gt; target: if the mid is not equal to target, we can get rid of it, and all the element on the right hand side of this mid. Because the array is sorted, all the elements on the right hand can only be equal or greater than array\[mid\].

As long as the range is equal or greater than three we can ensure the minimization each time. After the search range minimized to two element left, we scan the two element from left to right to find the first element that equal to the target. 

Time: O\(logn\)

Space: O\(1\)

### CODE

```java
public class Solution {
  public int firstOccur(int[] array, int target) {
    // Write your solution here
    if(array == null || array.length == 0){
      return - 1;
    }
    int left = 0;
    int right = array.length - 1;
    while(left < right - 1){
      int mid = left + ( right - left ) / 2;
      if(array[mid] >= target ){
        right = mid;
      }else{
        left = mid + 1;
      }
    }
    if(array[left] == target){
      return left;
    }else if(array[right] == target){
      return right;
    }
    return -1;
  }
}
```

